Fileview examples

By Venkat Jagadish 1996 - Caltech
Adapted from Scripts/examples/XODUS/fileview/generate.g by Upi Bhalla 1995

This directory illustrates dumping and restoring simulation data from files,
using the diskio object. The xview object is used for the display.
The documentation for these two objects gives further details of their use.

Files:

1. generate_netcdf.g
	This is derived from one of the xview examples. It generates the data
	that will be stored in netcdf format. This is specified in the creation
	of the diskio element using the -fileformat option.
2. generate_FMT1.g
	This is essentially the same as generate_netcdf.g with the exception
        that the format used is FMT1. diskio defaults to this if the
        -fileformat option is not specified. Also the append and flush fields
        are set for the diskio element and this has the effect of adding to
        the file after a RESET and writing to disk at every time step
        respectively.  The flush option is painstakingly slow when the netcdf
        format is used and thus not recommended.
3. testfile
	This is the data file produced by the generate scripts. It is entirely 
	portable between different machine architectures if the netcdf format 
	is used. 
4. replayview.g
	This reads in the 3-D coordinate data from the data file in addition
	to the generated raw data from generate.g to replay it on an xview.	
5. replaygraph.g
	This reads in data from the file and uses it to plot it on an 
	xgraph.
6. simplot.g
	This script demonstrates the use of the xsimplot command (introduced
	in genesis 2.2) to plot data from the resulting data file (testfile)
	generated by diskio. 


Note: 
	When the diskio object is used to read data out of a data file 
	(FMT1/netcdf), the user need not specify as to what format the 
	the specified file needs to be opened in. diskio attempts to open
	the file in the appropriate format even if an incorrect format is 
	specified. See replayview.g, replaygraph.g and simplot.g.
 

A temporary file 'dout' (which matches the name of the diskio 
object in the generate scripts) will be created when the simulations are run. 
This is inconsequential and one can safely remove it.

Each of the example files has a run and a quit button, so the use of these
scripts should be obvious enough.
